>> Hello
and welcome to the Haskell weekly podcast. I'm your
host, Taylor Fausak. I'm the lead engineer
at I.T.. Pro T.V.
>> on I'm Cameron, another engineer here
at I.T.. Pro T.V.. And I just was going to
say thank you to all those who filled out
the Haskell survey. We will be looking for those
results here in the next couple weeks. But we're just
glad that we could get your participation in here what you
have to say in your feelings and thoughts about high school
as a whole. So thank you. Thank you, Thank you. I
really appreciate it. And I know Taylor does as well.
>> I'm Cody Goodman, another engineer here at I.T..
Pro T.V. and looking forward to talking
about simplifying deriving today.
>> Yeah. So this block post by Matt
Parsons came out a couple days ago, and it
proposes, I think, in the tweet where he
first announced it. He said terrible
ideas worth discussing. So here we are,
discussing them.
>> Ooh, there's three people. This is exciting.
Yeah. I mean, uh, as probably the least
experienced Haskell here, I will start with my
two cents. Uh, I think it was a
good article at the end of it. I was like,
Okay, yeah, I could get behind this because I
think, you know,
when I started high school, I didn't really
understand that there were different types of
deriving. Um, you know, really, Until
we talked about it, you know, even a couple of episodes of the
podcast to go about the various types of deriving.
And, you know, I think there's a lot of
boilerplate that, you know, he iterated through in this
podcast and in this block post that,
you know, I'm like, Oh, like it's just kind of eye
opening. So, you know, I'm really, you know, excited to
dive a little bit more about this. Um,
>> yeah, you mentioned, uh, a few episodes
ago. We talked about that post by Cohen IQ that really dug
into all the different types of deriving and what they do and when you
might want to use them. And this post, in
a way, is kind of the opposite of that. Where it's
suggesting, let's get rid of all those
differences and have fewer things that
kind of work or can have the same effect.
>> Yeah, I I do like how
How do you How do you pronounce that Kucinich
>> Kucinich is how I say it. I'm not sure if that's right.
>> Clinic. Okay, uh, I like
how they wanted to make everything
explicit. That be cool is like some agent rules or
something. It was like a stopgap until
something could potentially simplify deriving.
Because I think there's a lot of potential there.
>> Yeah, and, uh, let's let's get right
into what it would mean to simplify
deriving. So the very first thing
that he suggests, I hope, is something that everybody
can get behind, which is adding to the
list of stock deriving classes. Because
right now, with no extensions at all, there's only a handful of
things that you could drive like ik show
read X, I think popular
one.
I mean, I use it every day, only struck him
out. And there's a
bunch of extensions that just turn on like one extra class that you
can drive like funked er, foldable, traversable, that kind of
stuff. And it's weird that these aren't
included, and I think really the only reason I can think of is
that there hasn't been a new version of the language report
to include this stuff in? Yeah,
>> because I mean, these things air in most Haskell
packages are probably already enabled eso
I would, you know, think. Yeah, let's
just put these into the stock
deriving strategy. And I know we kind of talked
about this, actually. Last podcast, I think
where we said, you know, hey, let's get this group
of, uh actually, it's
two bodies. Go to this group of language extensions and just say,
Hey, here's this one language extensions that
includes all of these other ones. And I think that was kind
of, you know, Yeah, I don't think that would be necessary if we
could just you say All right, you know, stock derive
all these pretty normal classes.
>> Yeah, I think the core library committee was, uh,
since it's so hard to get a new report out, I think they were
trying to say what language
extensions. They wanted to be the default.
Asking the community about that. I think this would
be a good candidate for it. Things like Dr Funked er
foldable traversable.
>> Yeah, pretty much derive star like any of
them, except except derive
any class. So it's funny. We want to derive. Ah,
lot of individual classes, but not any class.
And he claims it's a foot gun. Uh, I
didn't immediately know why. Do you want do any on the way?
>> Yeah, I've been bit by before.
If, uh, if you want to derive something
Ah, and it's not stock. Derive a ble. You're
probably gonna see derive any classes
as a suggestion, and then you're
going to run it, and you're gonna get a a
runtime error. Hopefully not in production. And
it is definitely a foot gun.
>> Oof! Runtime errors are no good.
>> Mhm. Don't don't
e need to get, like, a little,
uh, sound effects. Yeah, Yeah, Something e.
I'm sure I'm sure the production team at I.T. here has
something for me. I'm gonna talk to him for next. Next
podcast.
>> Um, so, yeah, Matt wants to do away
with derive any class. And as part of that, he
also wants to do away with default
signatures, which is used to provide a
default implementation for a
method on a type class where the default
implementation has mawr constraints than what the type class
has and the canonical example here is where you have a
class where the class itself does not
have a generic constraint, but you can provide a default
implementation using generics. And so that has
a generic constraint on there. Um,
and he's suggesting that we get rid of it, I
think, by replacing it with
Iceland, Jack's favorite extension, driving
via
>> mhm. I mean, I
I think that's a good thing because
it's, ah, little bit confusing when you come
across, you know, this default signatures,
English language, language extension in real
life because you're like, Wait a second. What's going on here?
Um, I think you're driving via would have
been a much better option
here.
>> Yeah, I think a long as the driving via
solution subsumes what you could
do with dr any class and default
signatures. It's a no brainer.
Uh, it seems like a lot of people who write
generics code, though. Ah, and provide
implementations in their libraries. Ah,
use those two things together. So I don't wanna
I don't want to make their lives harder and
be able to derive less of our
ecosystem.
>> I think they're equivalent in power, at
least for type classes that only have one
type parameter for multi parameter type classes.
I think driving via doesn't work so well because you can't, like, switch
arguments around. Everything has to be. You know, you can
Onley leave the last spot empty
on. And I don't remember if he gets to that later in this post, Maybe he does.
But that's the only thing that comes to mind for me.
>> I'm sure I've seen some, like, driving via
composed before. I
>> don't know if
>> that lets you get around that
>> maybe listeners please let us
know because I'd be happy to be proven wrong about driving via
not working for multiple RAM type classes.
Yep. And then the next thing he wants to get rid of,
he's just on a tear here of getting rid of stuff is
generalized new type deriving, which is the one that
lets you delegate your instance
to the type that you're wrapping. So it's not done
generically, and it's not done stock. It just takes,
like if you're a rapper around text and you're driving to Jason,
it'll take texts to Jason instance and use it for
your type. He doesn't want that,
>> but yeah, because you can just do that with arriving via,
like, why not? Yeah,
these are things that are already possible, which is funny.
He's just saying like, Hey, why don't you style your code this way
rather than that way? Uh, you know, less
extensions, less hand
waving. And, you know, you only have to say, Okay,
what does deriving via do? And at that point,
you know, if you can focus on that, you're not
necessarily yeah, tied up when all the other
language extensions you're
>> using. Yeah, and it's funny. It's what Cody recommended
at the top of the show. A lot of this stuff could be I
mean, uh, maybe morally could be an
h lint rule. I don't know if agent can actually do this at the moment,
but it is the type of thing that a winter could
do for you. Mhm.
>> Yeah, for this one, specifically for General,
it's new type. Deriving Thio play devil's
advocate a little bit here. The only argument I could see
is that the generalized new type
deriving is a little bit shorter and you don't have
to specify text. Uh, but it's not
explicit. Uh, so I I try to
keep in mind arguments about keeping
boilerplate down. Ah, at the
forefront because I think they make a huge difference, especially
when everything comes together. But here I think it's
clearly not enough boilerplate
make a difference.
>> Yeah, And to me, the main win is not the boilerplate. It's
that with that long list of,
uh, type classes that you derived, you can be
challenging to know. Oh, that's a stock type class. That's how
it's going to be derived. That one has a default signature.
So that's how it's gonna be derived. And to Jason has,
uh, that's going to go through generalized new type driving,
and you can kind of build that intuition. But
why bother when you can just do derive via?
>> Yeah, but I mean kind of what to CODIS point here
is we now have to. If we change this
underlying type of user, I d. We're gonna have to make sure
we update it in the via instance,
or else we're going to get some serious side effects.
>> That's true. It might fail to compile. I'm not 100%. And it probably
depends on what type you change the inside of user I
d to be
>> right. Yeah, If they're not,
I forget the word uh, it goes back. Worse able, I
>> think. Yeah, and I think that's
actually one other difference between generalized new type
driving and driving via. Is that
with generalized new type driving? I think it literally
uses, like the same instance, dictionary behind the
scenes, whereas with driving via it builds a new
instance dictionary that happens to call coerce for all of
these things. So maybe there's a difference in
runtime performance, although I doubt it would matter. In practice,
>> there is not. There's a there's a paper
a while back, I think five or six years ago,
Uh, not a paper. A Talk by
Simon Peyton Jones, which is zero cost
corrosion. So it's that title is
equal. No loss and
>> performance. Excellent. Thank you,
SPJ
>> Uh huh. Nice. Well, then he kind
of, you know, keeps on. There's tear here
with another removal, getting rid of
the deriving strategies language extension,
which I don't have a
feeling one way or another. Here it seems like
less is better when
>> there's only two choices, and one of them is in tactically
obvious with that keyword via why do you need
to specify stock with the other one?
Mhm
>> Yep. Totally in favor. This one if, Ah,
if you If you remove ah
stock, then there's no point in having
that.
>> Yeah, I really like how he does this to where
this is like, we're building steps
here. Like, if we do this, then Oh, look, we can
also do this, and then it just gets simpler and simpler as you go
along.
>> Yeah, I think this is like, yeah, I love that I
love that is just, like building on top of each other, because for
me, I'm like, Oh, my gosh, I can see how,
like this one little change can lead to this
mawr structural large change that,
you know, I can reason better about it rather than be like we're
just gonna do this boom like, Okay, Why not Now
we have Why, uh, here in this block post. So
I really appreciate that.
>> Yeah, that's a good skill to have. It could be challenging
sometimes to, you know, have an
intuition and have an end goal in mind
and then also be able to break it down into the
constituent parts and show all the simple
steps in
>> between. And I don't know that
Matt Memphis has a serious post. I'm pretty sure that he
didn't. But another upside of having these small pieces
that build on each other is that if he
did want to turn this into, like a real G.H.C. proposal,
each one of these could be done individually, and it wouldn't be too
big of a change at each step.
>> Uh, first I took it at
face. Value is, it's a joke, but it's starting to seem like a pretty
serious joke.
>> I'm not so sure. I
mean, he seems to have some passionate about it. I mean, he's
really taking his time here and really kind of
diving in.
>> Yeah, it's It's either a dedicated bit
or he's serious.
Um, and now, after we've removed all of these things,
finally we're on to He wants to add something or
allow some new thing. Um, and this
is, uh, in the same way that you can do
underscores in type signatures or type
applications, toe like plug in some type there.
He's suggesting a new use of underscores on
deriving clauses to allow
plugging in some types.
>> Who? Ah,
>> Uh huh, Yeah. I I'm a big fan of
the wild cards anywhere we can get them that they make
sense. Uh, sometimes you sacrifice
a little bit of readability, but, um,
if if you keep using them, that is,
uh, But if you use them as tools toe figure out
what the types would be, what the valid types would be,
that's that's awesome.
>> Yeah, And this would remove that, like, worry that I
had earlier about like, Oh, you change the underlying
type. Well, this underscores gonna figure it out. So
that also leads me to believe that I
was incorrect in my previous assumption that this would
probably call cause a compilation
air if it was the wrong type.
>> Yeah, I do like how this ends up
looking, but my main complaint with it is that it starts to
remind me a little of like, um Scala
or pure script or closure, where they have
these kind of magical symbols that mean a lot of different
things in different contexts and underscores already
that in Haskell. So, like it can mean for
a type application, it can mean I am intentionally not supplying
this argument. Whereas for a type
signature, it can mean
G.H.C.. Tell me what to put in here or if you have the
partial type at what? Partial type
signatures language extension on it means I'm
not specifying this one. So and it means
1000 other things too. I think type classes has a whole page listing all of
the things.
>> I mean, you, uh,
totally threw me off there. I was like, Wait, it has
multiple meanings. I guess I just sort of
internalized them or something. I was struggling to
come up with what you meant. Uh,
yeah. Just took me a
>> second. Yeah, it has a lot of
meetings, especially now with type holes
and type applications. And yeah, but
anyway, I'm in favor of this. I think it makes sense. It's like a
you know what should go here. So don't make me spell it out,
right or maintain it
and keep it up to date, like you were saying.
And now we land on something that I think is actually a
little divisive. Maybe
which is removing attached, deriving,
which really means turn on standalone
driving and make that the only way to do
stuff right and stand alone. Driving is where, instead
of hanging the driving clauses on the
data type. They're all separate top level
declarations.
>> Yeah, I would also be on the
e Don't really want to do this
style. Um,
because I mean, in the current state of standard and
driving like that's a ton of boilerplate like that's a lot off
stuff to see. Um, yeah,
it still reads fairly well, in my opinion, like just looking at
the example here, like it seems readable. But
it does seem like
unnecessary.
>> Yeah, and it's funny because we were just talking about how Matt did
a good job building these things step by step. But I feel like here he put these
steps out of order because the next one is about
removing boilerplate from the standalone driving. So I feel like
that one should come first. And then we get rid of the
non standalone driving,
>> right? I agree, because, ah, the
improved syntax for stand alone that makes a
lot lighter weight. Then it's like,
Okay, those those air definitely close enough.
And this can fit into this whole plan of
subsuming all these
>> things. Yeah, so
maybe flip flop, the order those and then we can kind of
b'more on board with all right? Yeah, like standalone driving
is not too bad,
>> right? And so the lightweight standalone
syntax That's the next section here. And I think
essentially what that does is instead of
requiring you to put one type class
per deriving declaration, you can put a
bunch so you can remove a lot of the duplication.
>> Yeah, there's some nesting there, which that gets a little bit
confusing. But at the end of the day, like
I can still parse it,
>> right? Yeah. Start
duplication sometimes I do. Sorry,
Taylor. Uh, sometimes the duplication no. Makes
my eyes start glazing
>> over. Yeah, for me. I kind
of prefer reading the
duplicated version because it's very clear I'm driving this
instance for this type, but I know that I wouldn't want to
write that. And I would probably end up having like, a snippet in my editor
that just plunk that in there already copy pasting lines all over the
place. Um, and the really
compact, non duplicated version I
would probably prefer to write, but looking at it, I really have to
think like, OK, this is the type these air, all the
classes. This is where everything plugs together and I could figure it out, but it takes me a
bit longer.
>> Yeah, but that's also because it's not a normal thing, right?
Like, if it was a normal day to day
interaction with Haskell, then yeah, we'd be like, All right, we know what
this is doing. So I mean, this is a
proposal, right? Like air quotes around that,
Um and so you know,
not everything in here is gonna be something we're like, Yeah,
we're totally get used to that because it's new.
It's a change. It's different than what we're normally used
to. So I think that can
always, you know, people don't like change. We know
this first hand I.T. pro because we're, you know, currently updating
how are user experiences are courses. And,
you know, we're getting some pushback because, like, Well, we don't We don't want to
change. We have this certain workflow were used
thio on dso like that. Same for Haskell. Developers like
we're all used to our workflow and so jump something
different is gonna rub us the wrong way.
>> Mhm. And
now we're getting to the really interesting stuff
which is removing stock deriving. So all of the
type classes that the report
specifies and that we added as our very first
step in this process. Let's get rid of all of them and
instead, at a new type in base
somewhere or actually, it may already be
provided. I don't know if it does not, but
some new type called stock.
And if you want stock driving, you go via
stock. Otherwise, you go via something else. I think this is
pretty clever. Yeah,
>> yeah, I agree with that. Um uh, I,
uh it's kind of like list does
where it goes to extreme, of building up all of its
standard library of itself. I
think with things like internals defined,
like everything else, uh, people will be more
likely to be ableto understand things and contribute as
well.
>> Yeah, it is a little mind bending to see
deriving generic via
stock and then deriving to Jason via
generically. It's like, Okay, so that would carry the
one.
Okay,
>> this is how we did. Yeah. I mean,
from this example that's in this section,
you know, I'm also like, Well, why do we even still have
those underscores? Like, couldn't we figure out how tow away
toe like, get this thing toe
in for what type it is.
>> Yeah, well, because sometimes you want,
like if you derived via text, you don't reference to your
type it. All right, so you do need that
underscore in there, but it would be nice if you could get rid of it.
Like if it's a type that accepts one more
parameter, go ahead and plug the type I'm driving for in
there. Be pretty sneaky. Yeah,
anything. And then we get to the last
suggestion here, which is actually,
uh, kind of a reversion of one of the earlier ones. Or like an
alternate path to take, which is to remove
standalone deriving. So previously we were talking about
only having, I guess, stand apart or
Onley standalone, deriving, not attached arriving.
And he's suggesting that instead you could
Onley have attached arriving. But I don't really
get why he suggests this.
>> Yeah, I don't super get it either. I think the
posts was good on it. Done. This was
just kind of a little like I know you guys were all mad at me
for saying, you know, get rid of attached driving. So
here's what we could do if we kept attached
arriving and got rid of standalone deriving. But we
really still need standing on deriving in
those instances where we have to create an orphan instance
or specify, you know, a context for a
global a t t or get get
generalized get it generally, yeah,
global. I'm just I'm just out of this
world, man. I'm all about this world, man. I'm just global,
>> but yeah, I think it's interesting that, like a language
like peer script doesn't even allow orphan instances whether or not
you derive them. But with the changes he suggested so
far, you would not be able to derive an orphan
instance or sorry you would be able to. But if you want with this remove
standalone driving, you wouldn't be able to And maybe that's a good
thing. You shouldn't be doing orphan instances except
there was a post. Maybe last week or the week before That was suggesting
your work in instances air Probably fine.
>> E mean, sometimes you got to, you
know,
>> right, So if this was this was sort of a
concession, I'm betting that since this wasn't
since this was a concession,
uh, that he has something in mind
to be able to still drive orphan instances.
Because that's an even more divisive
>> thing.
Yeah, I agree with Cam. This seems kind of
tacked onto the end. I'm not clear what he's going for here.
>> Yeah, but e mean, at that point,
we're at the end, right? We already says the
terrible post is over.
>> It wasn't that bad, man. Who's a good post?
I agree.
>> Yeah. Good ideas. Like a like I tweeted. I
think I love this. Have looked at a few more times.
I still like it very much. Maybe love it? Not
sure, but a lot of good things in here.
>> I really like how this, um,
simplifies the Haskell language by
drilling down on something that we're all familiar with. And I think we
have become accustomed to and maybe a little blinded
by the amount of complexity that's hidden there. So, like,
we don't really think twice about turning on
all these driving extensions, mostly because we hide them away in
our package descriptions. So, like our cable file, just as
driving star turned on pretty much
and in our code most of the time, we're doing
either stock driving or generic driving.
So it's just in that list of stuff. So, like day today,
it's not that big of a deal. But reading through these changes makes me
think like, yeah, there's a lot of room for improvement here. And as a side
effect, the language report gets simpler, and
that's good to see.
>> Always, always a positive, right? Yeah,
>> yeah, I'm definitely in favor of simplifying
things, removing foot guns.
I do wanna be careful not to remove
some of the features that power users
use, but that
that's something that's sort of a case by case basis.
>> Yeah, And what would the
backwards compatibility be for something like
>> this? E think
none. Yeah.
Don't upgrade your G.H.C. or use lots of
the sea pre processor.
>> Yeah, No, I feel like we need some sort
of, uh, way to
upgrade. If that were the case, if we should do something like
this
>> Well, I think realistically, if the's
were proposed and were accepted and were
implemented, it would be like
the There's a warning now in G.H.C.
for not providing a deriving
strategy when you derive. So would be, I think,
similar to that where we would add the new
behavior and potentially add a warning so that you
could upgrade your code and then two or three versions from
there we would remove the old behavior. All
right. But also, I think nothing like this has been
done before with G.H.C.. So who knows what they would
do?
>> Fifth cool. Well, anyways, Matt, it
was a great post. I would encourage all of our listeners to go
check
>> it out. Agreed? I had fun walking through it with you all.
Same insane. All right, well, I
think that will do it for us. Um,
Cody, any closing thoughts about this post?
>> Um, no, I I agree with it. In general, I
really wanna simplify the Haskell
language. Uh, I will say, uh, not at
any cost.
That's an important one,
but definitely want to
strip off some of these things and unify these
concepts.
>> Yeah, All right.
>> Thanks for listening to the high School weekly podcast. The high school we
could podcast is brought to you by I.T. pro T.V.
the e learning platform for I.T. professionals.
Also our employer. And they would love to an extend an
offer for 30% off the lifetime of your script
subscription. Wow, that's a really hard word to say.
Subscription with the promo code
Haskell Weekly 30 All one
word No spaces. Capitalization doesn't
matter. Um, and that will give you 30% off the
lifetime of your subscription. So please, please, please go check it
out. If you're interested, go see the
content. Also, if you're not quite sure, please
sign up for a free membership. That way you can kind of see what there
is. We would love to see you on the I.T. pro
T.V. platform.
>> We sure would. And that will do us do it for us this
week. Uh, once again, I've been your host, Taylor. And with me
today was Camera and Cody from my team. Um,
if you want to learn more about Haskell Weekly, you can check out our
website Haskell weekly dot news, where you could
sign up for our newsletter, subscribe to this podcast,
and, uh, find us on social media like Twitter.
YouTube. Get hub. Read it. I don't
know what else is there out there everywhere.
Eso Yeah. Roots cape were not on
moonscape yet. No. Sorry.
Thanks for listening. And
>> we'll see you next week. See you